You don't compete with your users. You
follow what your users want and you
build products that uniquely provide
value. So what we're looking at from
from the perspective of our product road
map is what are the demands of the users
and what are the niches where we can
build and solve these demands better
than than anything else that that exists
today.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Hey everyone, welcome to the Smart
Economy podcast where we ask your
favorite builders the questions you wish
you could ask yourself. This is a
production of neonnewstoday.com and I'm
your host Dylan Grabowski. In this
episode of the Smart Economy podcast,
we're joined by Alex Glucowski, the
co-founder and CEO of Matter Labs, the
steward of the ZKSync ecosystem.
In this conversation, we discussed
blockchain's intersection of freedom and
technology,
zero knowledge proofs solving onchain
scaling and identity, why Ethereum will
continue to be used in 20 years, how the
ZK stack out competes the OP stack,
institutional adoption and institutional
need for onchain privacy, and so much
more. Just a reminder, nothing said in
this podcast is a solicitation to buy or
sell any tokens and that the guest or
host might hold tokens discussed in any
given episode. You can check out a full
disclaimer at neonnewtoday.com.
If you enjoyed this episode, please rate
and review it on your favorite
podcasting platform and share with your
friends and family. Every rating,
review, like, and comment really does
help us reach more people and bring you
more of your favorite guests. With all
that said, I really enjoyed this
conversation with Alex, and I hope you
enjoy it, too. Hey everyone, welcome to
the Smart Economy podcast. Today, we're
joined by Alex Glowski, the co-founder
and CEO of Matter Labs, an engineering
team that is dedicated to stewarding the
direction of the ZKsync ecosystem. Alex,
how are you doing today?
>> Pretty well, thank you. I'm excited to
be here.
>> Yeah, I'm super psyched. Um, just
digging into I've been a big fan of
ZKYNC for a long time, so I guess I'm
coming in with a bias already of of
being a fanboy, but before we kind of
like dig into ZK Tech and L2s and the ZK
stack and everything in general, um, you
have kind of a fun winding path that led
you to to building in blockchain. Um, so
before you were in crypto, you were you
were more broadly in tech. And I think
um kind of like the the the wow moment
when I was looking at what you were
working in before was how you helped
build Europe's largest camper
marketplace. So can you just share a
little bit about what your
pre-blockchain background was and uh the
winding roads that led you to building
in Matter Labs?
>> Absolutely. I uh my whole life I've been
working uh in tech uh starting with high
school doing math olympiads uh
programming uh contests uh and then
working in in computer science uh
studying computer science working in in
a number of startups as tech lead and
and CTO um eventually co-founding a
couple of things uh Paul Camper the
largest camper sharing platform in
Europe um one of them uh and then
blockchain was the uh intersection of
another passion of mine which is uh the
idea of freedom. Uh like when I learned
about Bitcoin, it felt like wow this is
the combination of this very deep very
interesting technological
um thought combined with uh a product
that can help more create more freedom
for the world and that does so without
having to go through the political
process. You know you don't have to go
and convince people. it just works like
you buy more Bitcoin the price goes up
everyone is happy u and then Ethereum
was a natural extension of that where I
saw the path for us to create a real
alternative financial system and I think
it's playing out really well in this
long run over uh over the course of 10
years we are on cusp of actually uh
entering the full scale global economy
with Ethereum with stable coins with
DeFi with all the other innovations that
we're doing in crypto and um to me it's
personally a uh emotionally very
compelling um mission like we we've been
on a mission to increase the world's
freedom from the day one of uh starting
Metal Labs and Ziki Singh uh because I
am coming from a place where economic
freedom was very restricted I was born
in Soviet Union grew up in in Ukraine
shortly after the collapse of Soviet
Union experienced the hyperinflation for
a couple of years with the prices would
go up every day. Uh I remember how the
trust in societal institutions and trust
in society in general collapsed and
everyone was on their own and you don't
know who you can trust. You definitely
don't trust the government. You
definitely don't trust the financial
system, the currency or the banks. No
one in their sane mind would keep the
savings in the bank. you would obviously
do it with US dollars that you buy on
the street and then and you have to
guard them against criminals uh and you
hide them somewhere in in your
apartment. So it's very unpractical to
move to store uh quite dangerous. Um and
you don't have access to the global
economy. You cannot invest in anything.
You cannot you know your choices are
very limited. Uh and then crypto fixes
all of this like for real in uh Eastern
Europe in in the parts of Asia, in Latin
America, um everywhere. Crypto offers
opportunities to people to uh preserve
their savings and to to interact freely
with other people all around the world.
And this is I think um the
has been most impactful and remains the
most impactful way you can improve the
world in my opinion.
So like when when people think about
privacy and our data online um you know
if you say Facebook minds your data and
they use that to make money off of you
people are of course upset about it. And
on paper, I I don't like the way that
sounds, but the billions of people still
use Facebook. Billions of people still
use Instagram. Billions of people do not
use privacy preserving web browsers like
Brave. So, we have this weird dichotomy
where people recognize they want their
their digital sovereignty, they want to
be able to protect their data, but they
don't actually participate in ways that
improve the security and the protection.
So I'm curious from your perspective
given the experience of of growing up in
a rebuilding part of the world where you
didn't have people who trusted the
currency and the dollar or or the money.
Are your peers from when you were
growing up, are the people who are still
living in Ukraine and these different
parts of the fallen USSR, are they
bought in to what blockchain and what
cryptocurrencies can offer? Um, because
using the experience of of Facebook and
protecting your digital identity, people
say they care, but they don't really use
new technologies to improve that. So are
you finding your peers, the people who
are our age, um are they using like
stable coins, bitcoin, privacy
preserving cryptocurrencies,
um is this something that has taken
mainstream hold?
>> Uh absolutely. Ukraine is one of the
countries with the highest penetration
of crypto in everyday use for for the
reasons uh that that I explained before
that I think this is a very deep um
sense of mistrust in government that
that has transcended generations and and
even younger people have this and it's
the same in lam uh when you talk about
Facebook I think there are different
degrees of um privacy
uh importance
like when you share cat pictures with
your friends and then and NSA can can
learn about it. Uh it maybe not
something that bothers people that much
but it's very different when it comes to
your everyday financial transactions and
your net worth and when imagine if
everyone would be walking on the street
and everyone else would know how much is
how much money is in you. you would not
feel safe especially you would not feel
safe in in in the third world countries
um or when uh uh a business would
disclose all of this operations all of
this payments all of this procurement um
supply chains to all the competitors
this would not work in real world the
the reason people are so comfortable
with crypto being open is they I think a
lot of people have a um sense maybe
losery sense of pseudonymity that oh I'm
hiding like sure everyone can see my
transactions but no one knows who I am
and they can't connect the address to my
name which is true to an extent if
you're going through exchanges you want
ramp off ramp etc um like it's it's not
as publicly visible but it's actually
very trackable and there is a very good
ways to statistically analyze especially
with AI so it's definitely something
that is not going to work for businesses
it's definitely not something that's
going to work for institutions like if
we're talking of on boarding crypto and
integrating crypto in uh every aspect of
the real world economy this is just a
no-go. So and and apart from that of
course we have a much deeper
philosophical uh debate on cypher punk
and and the relationship with
governments in general and I'm a huge
supporter like this this has been our
core values uh at Ziki Singh for for a
long time. Uh so I'm I'm really happy to
see the the rise of Zcash again in the
public uh my share and and all of this
debate around like cyberpunk hardcore
privacy. Uh and uh this this is
absolutely fantastic. Um this is one
part of uh of the privacy debate. The
other part is how do we on board
institutions and and businesses and they
need slightly different set of tradeoffs
and we need to support both. We need
full personal privacy for individuals.
We need this compliant privacy for
institutions. And we need a way for them
to interoperate very seamlessly. And
this is going to happen with uh public
blockchains uh such as uh uh Zcash and
Ethereum uh uh with transparent bridges
and yeah we we can talk more about that.
Our focus at at Marabs and Ziki Sync has
shifted from the um individual like
focus on individual uh accounts and
individual uh interactions to this more
institutional enterprise space because
we see the uh ROI on bringing the
institutions in the crypto space today
as the highest uh of what we can achieve
to push this status quo forward with
crypto in general. Yeah, I'm really
excited to dig into Providium with you
in a bit. Um, because if you go to like
RWA.xyz,
you can see all the RWAs, real world
assets that are clearly becoming this
large meta of institutional onboarding.
And we're seeing equities, corporate
bonds, private debt, stable coins,
treasury bills, all of this, the the
amount of capital that's coming on chain
is just up and to the right on the
chart. And so I'm really excited to to
dig into Providium and how you guys are
um meeting the institutions in the
middle so that they can kind of like
have a security enabled chain. But um I
do want to touch on that a little bit
later. Um before we kind of start going
into the ZKSync ecosystem, um I'm just
really curious to hear about um your
your choice in when you started
building. You you clearly stumbled upon
Bitcoin um 2011, 2012, 2013, but Matter
Labs wasn't founded until December 2018.
So, what was the kind of moment in your
mind, the turning point when you said,
"Okay, I'm going to be I'm going to be
leaving the kind of like computer
science generalist world and I want to
start building Matter Labs now. I want
to start building in the blockchain
space." And to kind of like add on to
that, what was the vibe like back in
December 2018? We were in the depths of
the bare market back then. All your
friends probably thought you were crazy.
What was like the vision of what you
wanted to build and was it very like ZK
focused back then?
>> It was the rise of Ethereum. So at this
uh bear of 2018, it was right after the
ICO hype. Um it was luckily not my first
bear. I've experienced it with Bitcoin.
I bought Bitcoin uh at a very low price.
I think the first Bitcoin I bought was
at $8 $80 when I was going buying all
the way up to 700 and then I sold all of
it at 300 uh because the the bear was
prolonged and I thought like okay this
that's that's it that that was the uh
the end of Bitcoin but then with the
second hype it was clear that yeah
there's some cyclical market structure
and we have a good chance that this will
continue and and we will actually on
board more people but with Bitcoin the
problem was it was not usable. So you
mentioned people using uh Facebook. I
still want to come back to this. Um and
you're relying on on like you're still
like not caring about privacy, not not
caring about some other aspects. People
respond to incentives. They want to use
products that solve their problems.
They're not there to just altruistically
and idealistically
promote some agendas. They have a
problem. They want a they want a
solution and they they're going to pick
the tool that is best suited to solve
their problem with a set of trade-offs
that they have with Bitcoin. This idea
of hyper bitcoinization that everything
is going to embrace Bitcoin and all the
payments will happen there. Uh I tried
to embrace that in the um camper sharing
startup
start start accepting payments in
Bitcoin and I realized they cannot
justify putting this on a road map cuz
it has a cost but who's going to use it?
Like it's it's not convenient. Most
people cannot handle seed phrases. Like
it was absolutely unthinkable that that
you will have like everyone in in
society using this clumsy technology
that we had back then dealing with the
volatility of the price uh dealing with
security issues uh like handling
security that properly as as you would
expect from uh as as we know is
necessary for self-custody crypto. But
Ethereum
rising gave a hope of solution to many
of those problems. So we had ideas of
stable coins floating around. We had the
ideas of smart contract wallets. I am
surprised that it took us 8 or 10 years
to actually like fully implement on
those because it those problems felt
like they are relatively simple and we
have people with web two experience who
are going to jump on them and solve our
famine. this is not something we should
be doing. So I looked into problems that
from my perspective was were harder to
solve that not going to be immediately
solved by by some very very smart people
and scalability was one of them and
scalability did not feel like an acute
problem back then because the prices the
the fees for transactions were very low.
But then we had the cryptoius crisis and
it showed very vividly to everyone that
you know if we cannot bring one simple
game on on chain how we're going to
bring the entire world economy. So if
the thesis of Ethereum really works if
we're building this finance 2.0 and all
things that touch value will come on
chain eventually we will need much much
much higher scale. And so I spent uh I
started consulting. I had to switch
full-time to crypto. Uh and I went to
different conferences. I tried to read
as much as I can being terminally on
Twitter. Uh learning everything I could
about Ethereum, Bitcoin, scaling um all
the other problems we have. And
um there were a couple of solutions to
scaling problem uh that felt like
they're not going anywhere. They they
felt too clumsy. And then I learned
about their knowledge growth and about
this um aspect of compression of
computation. Uh and it felt like magic.
It felt like really really uh exciting
and uh almost too good to be true and it
was too good to be true at the time
because the cryptography was not quite
uh quite there. And um I thought like I
I just have to dive uh very deep uh into
this and and find people who are um can
understand these complex things uh
without uh you know any good on ramping
materials. You you just have to had to
read cryptography papers back then and
try to implement code back based on
them. There was no popular tutorials, no
books, no you know was a completely uh
uh wild space the full frontier and so
this is how we started building and it
took us many years indeed to to make to
to take those technologies to become
mature and it was an effort of the
entire space. We contributed a lot from
Zikync. We built the very first ZK
rollup on Ethereum that actually worked.
We built the very first ZK EVM. We we we
brought the recursion. We made a number
of advances but there were other teams
who made incredible contributions and
and like really it was a collective
effort of the entire space to get to
where we are today. And today we just
yesterday we announced um um the
airbender the proof system our our
latest uh and greatest proof system
which is the fastest prover in the world
entering the leaderboard of the ETH
proofs being almost two times faster
than the than the next uh prover on the
list proving full Ethereum blocks on the
single with Ethereum's
data structure with everything like
complete Ethereum blocks not modified
not not optimized for proving
all in all in 50 seconds on a single
GPU. So like you can prove now Ethereum
blocks on on your local machine on the
local gaming computer at home. Uh
um which is which is absolutely
incredible. So um it was a long turn.
>> Yeah. So I think when somebody's hearing
this and they might not be like a a tech
wonk when you say like ZK solutions
sounded too good to be true, it's
because ZK offers this ability to
increase scalability at an exponential
rate. And there's also privacy
preserving features that can be used
within the technology. And I myself have
been in working in the crypto space. Um,
I bought my first Bitcoin summer of 2017
and then by January 2018 I left a whole
previous career working for the
government and ended up in the
blockchain space. Um, and all I can
remember from basically day one there
was this kind of like lingering um,
murmurss of ZK ZK tech. ZK is going to
solve everything. But we didn't really
see anything until Vitalic started
talking publicly about ZK late 2020. But
then we still didn't even see test nets
coming out until late 23 and 2024 was
really the year of like ZK powered test
nets. So I guess the question I want to
ask is why was ZK so hard to find why
did it take so long and why was it so
difficult to finally start seeing
tangible technology that blockchain
users could use after we were talking
about it for for so many years. What was
the earliest computer that you remember?
Uh jeez, I don't even remember the
model. It was I I played like Space
Invaders with and the screen was black
and orange.
>> Black and orange. So it was uh Did you
run DOSs or what operating system?
>> Yeah, DOSs. And we were using floppy
discs.
>> Floppy disc and you would have to type
the name of the program and execute and
console and you like everything was
taxed and everything was really really
small, slow and like maybe 8 bit music
whatever, right? Uh and now fast forward
to the uh u iPhone that you hold in your
hand and what you all things you can do
there with um streaming and AI and
virtual reality and like just my like
you know translation of of real voice.
Um this is the um kind of the orders of
magnitude of improvement in computation
uh difference that that you can tangibly
feel like when when you go from uh uh I
don't know like
1 megaby of RAM to
uh terabytes of RAM. This is what you
get and this is kind of on a similar
order of magnitude improvement that we
got in ZK proving performance from the
first uh like from from the time when
when we were starting to where we are
today. So I I I it's several orders of
magnitude and and on each order of
magnitude you get um to a different
level of experience and when they
compound you get something completely
unrecognizable. So back then we were
only able to prove like some very very
basic statements and it took us hours to
do this. Uh now we can prove all of
Ethereum with the entire complexity uh
of what's happening there uh on a single
GPU. Like back back then it would take
like I don't know like we would we would
not even be able to do this at all. It
would be prohibitively expensive. We
would not have enough GPUs in all of the
worlds to prove Ethereum blocks at this
capacity at at at this speed. But then
uh the reason it felt too good to be
true is as you said it's this
exponential ability to verify
exponential growth on what we can verify
how we can prove it or prove and then
verify and to give it to to put it under
a different angle.
We can prove
everything that is happening in the
world like all of the transactions of
value of like 10 billion people all of
the economics all of the payments all of
the trading everything and then we can
recursively start combining this proofs
together. So here's this like Visa is
doing the Visa things like 2,000 TPS. We
start proving those blocks. NASDAQ is
doing trading. We start proving those
blocks. all of the crypto uh each
individually we start proving those
blocks and we start combining them
together and then combining the proofs
of proofs the proofs of proofs and
proofs of proofs until we get a single
proof which we can put on let's say on
Ethereum and then we produce a proof of
Ethereum itself and we have a single
proof of all the proofs in the world
which we then put on a mobile phone and
you can verify it in one second and it
your phone does not care if it's
millions or billions or trillions of
transactions
This is the magic, the singularity that
you can take all of that and compress
into a single point which is really easy
to verify for everyone. So we can truly
synchronize the entire world on this
thing with math having the full
mathematical guarantees of trust between
every single individual in the world all
aligned all synchronized by a single
settlement layer. This is the
fascinating part of of this game.
>> So I'd like to dig into this a little
bit more then. In previous interviews,
you've mentioned that Ethereum has
proven itself to be the settlement layer
of the world. Going do you think that
moving forward we should be entering a
world where new chains shouldn't be
launching as L1's? They should be
building as L2s and leveraging Ethereum.
Why is Ethereum the chain that is one? I
mean, um, even when we went back to the
example you gave, you asked me what my
first memory of of my first computer
was, there's no way in hell I would use
that computer at all today. So, as we
use this kind of example of technology,
why would we still be using Ethereum in
20 years? Uh, well, Ethereum is a
network that's going to be evolving. So,
it's just like, are you still using the
internet? It's still the same internet
as as was there in the from the 1990s,
but it's also not not exactly the same
internet. You're like all of the nodes
on this network have been replaced. All
of the links of this network have been
replaced with something upgraded, right?
So like you you you have the continuity
but the technology continues evolving.
And uh similarly here the the network
effects is what matters. Ethereum is
today the financial internet period.
Yes, you will have other chains and they
will have their moments of glory and and
their role in in in some parts of the
world and we'll see a lot of
experimentation and I think that a lot
of experimentation we see today with
their ones will inevitably come back and
they will quickly realize that the cost
they have to pay for their security is
vastly
um greater than what you would pay for a
much better security if you were in
Ethereum L2. The uh uh the thing with
crypto is the markets have are quite
irrational and we see like a lot of
deviations and a lot of extremes and
then we see the return to mean after a
while. So we've seen it with NFTTS,
we've seen it with um a lot of other
things with ICO uh that that we uh
touched on before. Um I think what
people see today with L1 is this L1
premium which actually like N1 premium
in in terms of token price which
actually stems from the fact that you
have to pay a lot for security of those
tokens. So uh it's not something that's
going to be sustainable there. Why would
you pay tens or hundreds of millions of
dollars every year to your validators?
Like what like Imagine that you can
build a a business um uh where
you pay for the rent $10 versus you pay
for the rent $10 million, but you
provide the same services. Like you have
a cafe, you have the exact same
construct. In fact, like the the one the
guy who's paying more actually has like
worse security. like you your your door
is not quite locked. The walls are from
wood and the other guy is uh having like
an concrete uh perfect uh building super
safe and you both offer the same
services. Maybe it's like banking or or
cafe or whatever restaurant, right? But
the one is paying like gazillions for
for for the rent. Who of them will stay
in business longer?
like like paying more for security does
not give you any other advantage. It's
just a cost. It may give you a short
advantage in the in in the short term
because the markets are rational. You
can pump your token and then uh whatever
uh try to sell it, but eventually the
market is going to see that it it's not
a sustainable structure.
>> Interesting. So I guess I when you look
at the the rollup landscape in EVM land,
um the kind of internal battle has been
between the ZK stack and the OP stack.
And I think that it was kind of an
unfair race that the OP stack got to got
to start running a little bit before the
ZK stack just because there wasn't as
much technical complexity. So, um,
forgive me if I'm painting this, um,
competition for for for L2s and for
roll-ups and the EVM ecosystem in an
unfair manner, but the way I I look at
it from an outsers's perspective who's
not building on EVM, um, there's the ZK
stack and there's the OP stack. So, is
this a real competition right now? And
if it does really exist, are we finally
getting to a point with the SDKs and the
other types of composibility that ZKS
Stack offers? Are we getting to a point
where ZK is finally catching up to be
able to compete uh toe-to-toe with OP
Stack?
Uh look, ZK stack was not able to offer
the same uh functionality up to this
year as the OP stack. It had some
advantages and they were used by uh so
there were there were a set of
trade-offs. Some people would take the
uh trade-offs and build on ZK stack. The
others would take the trade-offs and
build on the OP stack. And it turned out
that for the cryptonative crowd, the
tradeoffs of optimistic rollup back then
overweighted and more chains launched on
the pista. Now the uh um
uh this has completely changed this
year. This is this has dramatically
changed with the announcement with uh
the introduction of Atlas upgrade of ZK
sync uh of the ZK stack that uh was
introduced I think four weeks ago where
ZK stack is now
uh vastly more performant to the best of
my knowledge that any chain running OP
stack we have measured over north of
15,000 TPS In terms of stable coin
transfers, of course, it depends on what
kind of transaction you do, but uh the
stable coin transfers is is the
benchmark I think is which is more more
most relevant in today's world. So
15,000 stable coin transfers per second
um at the cost of 0.001
per transaction. So like less than 100
hundreds of a cent per transaction in
proving costs and 1 second zk finality.
So we can now generate the proof for the
block of the ZK stack in 1 second and
settle this on the on the shared
settlement layer uh on on this uh on the
ZK gateway um protocol that we have
which would allow us to connect all of
these chains together with uh
1 second 2C latency on inter uh this is
something that OP chains today cannot
do. So once this interrupt goes live,
all of the ZK chains are going to be
united into a real single network
whereas the OP stack chains will remain
isolated. So this is going to be a huge
turning moment for for you to decide
like do what do you do? Do you want to
stay isolated or or do you need do you
want to connect and and take advantage
of this uh ever growing economy? Because
with op uh um the problem of of the op
stack, if you're isolated, your
connection to layer 1 is also very slow.
For you to withdraw funds to layer 1
takes canonically 7 days. So you can of
course use um third party bridges and
liquidity providers. That means you have
to integrate them. You have to pay them
to keep large amount of capital on your
chain. so that this uh the this
interoperability can actually work. Uh
this is costly, this is expensive, it it
it's it's a very high barrier entry for
new participants. If you want to launch
a new chain, you have to pay today
millions in integration costs to just
get the basics done. This is not
sustainable. This is not going to take
you to the world where every application
can become its own chain. Uh but you can
do that with the ZK stack. So once this
happens, once the the interop goes live
and it probably will go live in Q1 next
year, uh it's going to be a completely
different world with regard to to how
the these technologies are uh are
positioned um for the cryptonative
audience. But again like our focus for
the for the last year have been on
enterprises and institutions because we
see that as the 10x 100x,000x
larger market to expand crypto to
actually grow the pie instead of
competing for the same zero sum small
circle of uh of a few builders who are
building just purely cryptonative uh
applications. It's a lot more
interesting what we can achieve as an
industry once we bring the integration
of the true real world economy and this
is going to happen through integration
of enterprises, institutions, real world
businesses and this is what what uh uh
this is why
we have you know the kind of the grade
is almost secondary news to the uh
progress we made with previdiums with
focus on privacy.
Very cool. Um, so the the OP stack has
the super chain. What's kind of like the
the marketable
uh ecosystem of these ZK enabled um ZK
stacks? What's what's the name you guys
are going with?
>> We're calling the elastic network
because it can grow. You can stretch it
and it it can grow without limits. You
can continue stretching and expanding.
uh it's very elastic in in in terms of
the uh um upside potential and uh in
terms of be able to serve the growing
demand. You know, perfectly elastic
um supply is the supply in economy
economics that can follow demand without
limits.
So, I'm going to ask you to maybe give a
little bit of a spicy take here real
quick. Um, so we saw a lot of like
darling ICO chains from the 171 18 era.
We saw some of them migrate to L2s to um
maybe scratch the surface of market
relevance again. Um, like Lisk was an L1
in 2018 and is now an L2 in the EVM
ecosystem.
If you could take a wild guess, which OP
stack do you think will switch over to
the ZK stack in the coming years?
>> Uh, look, I think that uh in a few years
there will be no optimistic roll-ups
left at all. Like everything is going to
be ZK. They will try to upgrade uh OP. I
I think it's inevitable that like they
they have to upgrade uh and become ZK
roll-ups or everything is going to be
irrelevant. And I think it's going to be
easier to convert to the Ziki stack than
to upgrade in place. So for for some
cases you can operate in place but you
will have to maintain all the legacy of
the existing stack that was originally
designed for the uh optimistic for fraud
proof systems um which will come at a
cost like I I don't think that uh um
any of the uh that you will see the 1
second proving of the op stacks with
external exogenous uh proof systems
anytime soon because you have to
co-develop this technologies together.
It's like trying to take a propeller
plane and upgrade it uh to the uh uh to
become a jet plane. Your wing geometry
is not suited for this. Your other
systems are not ready for this high
speed. It like it's easier to just
change the plane into the the plane
fuselage entirely and just switch
completely um than try to do this this
upgrades in place. Now we'll we'll see
like they they they they must try they
have to do this because otherwise
they're not going to be relevant very
very soon. So which of the chains will
upgrade? Uh uh I I don't want to give
specific names but this is uh a trend
that is irreversible at this point.
>> That's fair. Um, okay. So, before we
kind of like dig into the institutional
side demand and who you're collaborating
with with Providium, um, I'm just
curious to hear what are the kind what's
like the the relationship with teams
that want to build a DAP or a product or
anything within the ZK sync ecosystem on
chain. How do how are projects coming
into the ecosystem to become a part of
the elastic network? Are they reaching
out to matter labs? Are you guys going
out and reaching out to teams and DAPs?
Are you finding people are just building
in the ecosystem and then you just kind
of like rub elbows when they need tech
support? What does the relationship look
like for going to onboard new DAPs into
the elastic network? Right now,
>> uh we have a broad community. We have uh
many teams that support each other that
are uh helping each other in various
ways. Malabs is one of the participants
of the this economy. Our focus is on uh
uh on institutions primarily. We reach
out and talk to them a lot. But we uh
sometimes we get cryptonative projects
referred to us and we also are helping
them. We have a uh strong partner
success team that's only job is to make
sure that the um teams and projects that
are building on Ziky sync that we work
with are successful and we help them on
the technical front. We help them on the
business front. We connect them to
investors. We connect them to to other
partners who uh infrastructure providers
or partners within the ecosystem who can
help. Uh uh we listen to them a lot. Our
road map is uh the road map of metalabs
that who who is the core contributor to
the zk stack is uh primarily driven by
the partners need. We're not coming and
saying like oh we're thinking this
amazing feature is is is is going to uh
it's going to make uh the thing shiny
and and exciting. No, we like we
prioritize based on what people need,
what will help them succeed and and move
faster. And this uh of course um
includes to a large part the existing
projects that are um that are building
on the elastic network with um uh
lodging you like from with different uh
verticals there from gaming projects
such as Exola which is huge and really
really exciting what they're going to
bring once they launch uh and integrate
to the existing network of over 1
billion users that are using gaming uh
um payments on on ramps from like it's
always they strive for payments. They're
really well known in the gaming world to
the recently integrated sand chain that
launched on on Zik Sync which is one of
the largest uh creator communities in
the world and and really large in Asia
um to abstract chain is also really well
known uh in in the entire crypto world
to lens to um uh then all all the
institutional partners. We just recently
announced the uh launch of the ADI chain
from Abu Dhabi which is a joint project
by IHC
uh the largest public traded company I
think in uh in Saudi in sorry in uh
United Arab Emirates. It's kind of the
black rock of Middle East and the first
Abu Dhabi bank, the largest bank in the
country who are on board to um launch
the first regulated dearham stable coins
and bring the entire nation on chain and
and connect all the regional countries
in and this huge network uh from Africa
to Asia to to everything in the Middle
East. Um and of course then the
institutional chains like the momento
blockchain which is the partnership with
the Deutsche Bank uh and many others
like I mean it can go on for for a long
time.
>> Totally. Um and also for listeners uh
Sanchain will be the episode you listen
to before this episode with Sebastian.
So uh very cool to kind of see the the
relationship between the two entities.
Um before we dig into kind of like
institutional demand, um I'm just
curious from somebody who's been
building in blockchain for seven plus
years now. Um what's your kind of like
road mapping strategy? It as we've seen,
you can say that you want to see this
grand technology that should take a year
or two to develop, but it takes five
plus years. So, how do you and your
teams go about collaborating and talking
with your partners and deciding on what
a road map should be? And what do you
think is kind of like the sweet spot for
for the length of time that a road map
should entail?
>> Well, at Malabs, we have many teams. So,
we develop the road map in parallel.
What we do is we talk to to partners. We
talk to the prospective partners. We uh
we have a product team and we take all
of this requirements and and then we
prioritize them and see like okay with
the existing resources we can have like
seven different tracks. What are these
tracks you're going to work on? Um uh we
do our best just moving every week and
and and like removing bottlenecks uh and
trying to get as fast as possible. And
sometimes you can predict things,
sometimes you cannot. And sometimes
you're surprised by how good the results
are uh beyond your expectations. So it's
it's a normal process just as a heavily
engineering
um based organization. Uh we have uh a
very strong engineering culture. We have
a very high bar uh of talent and uh we
strive to to keep this bar high and and
only keep increasing it. uh and um uh we
trust the the the teams with autonomy
and with freedom within the organization
to move fast and do things that are
necessary.
>> Awesome. Um on the road map for 2025, if
we look back at uh Matter Labs' road map
for ZKYNC, uh the sequencer layer was
kind of one of the the key steps on the
road map and the goal. There are three
different stages in EVM land. There's
stage zero. Stage one and stage two.
Stage zero being the least
decentralized, stage two being the most.
And the goal for ZKYNC this year was to
become a stage one rollup. So I want to
talk a little bit about sequencer
layers. What's the current path for for
becoming a stage one rollup? Is 2025
still the key year that ZKSync is eyeing
to become a stage one rollup? And then I
also just want to like throw in a
curveball and ask how will native
rollups impact um the current rollup
landscape.
>> Um sure. So let's talk about the
maturity stages of rollups which is the
concept Vitalik introduced and then was
embraced by L2B uh as a major um um kind
of arbiter of uh of the stages and and
auditor in the space. um they reflect
the maturity of the proving system and
they like they they have nothing to do
with the sequencer. They they apply to
the um uh security properties of your
chain or maybe even better said trust
assumptions of your chain. Who do you
have to trust for what for to keeping
your your for keeping your fund secure?
Um I think that the maturity framework
is
um a little inaccurate like the
different this is the case where
different um requirements were applied
to optimistic and and zk rollups. So
like they're not quite the same. Like a
difference between stage zero and stage
one optimistic rollup is much greater
than the stage zero and stage one zk
roll up. So I like the stage one zk
rollup is way better than the stage zero
uh optimistic rollup because you have
the security from ethereum already
um incorporated by the virtue of using
zk proofs in the first place. Whereas
for for an optimistic rollup if you
don't get to stage one you basically
don't have any security. It's trust me
bro proof of authority which is what
what they were for for a long period of
time. So um then for us to get from
stage zero to stage one does not really
increase like trustlessness a lot if you
have a decentralized set of validators
or sorry if you have a decentralized
governance for upgradability and you
have a sufficiently high uh threshold
security console. So your trust
assumptions between for stage uh stage
one rollups
essentially reside with the security
console. That's your bottleneck of of of
trust assumptions. And this is not going
to change
by by going from stage zero to stage
one. So we we still be doing this but I
think that more important is to get to
stage two where you have where you
basically removing the trust assumptions
in security council in any like finite
group of participants and you're fully
relying on Ethereum as um
um as a source of all sorts of security.
So this is a lot harder because you need
probably to some degree to oify your
protocol like as long as the protocol
keeps evolving.
You don't want to deploy something
immutable that is as complex as a rollup
and just say okay we we we think we're
done like everything is here is fine. um
nothing is going to change. Uh and we're
not like if something is going to
change, we're not going to introduce any
new box uh with the next upgrade. I
think we're not quite at that stage. So
I it will take a while for all of the uh
projects to reach stage two. Um so today
we are
um
like
on track. So, it's a project that that
we're doing, but there are a couple of
other things that I know have higher
priority because they are driven by
demands of the customers. So, I cannot
tell you exactly when stage one is going
to be reached because of that. Um, but
with uh on the sequencer side, what's
important is the sequencer
decentralization. And this is again
something that is very important for us
to make sure that you don't have
censorship in real time by by a single
sequencer. And this is something that is
also coming. And again to it's hard to
say exactly when it's coming because
this has not been something that was in
demand from any of the um or like any
large number of uh of projects that are
building today. every everyone was more
um or had more pressure to implement
higher performance, lower latency, lower
block times, solve some other technical
issues before
that becomes a a major priority. Um so
it will definitely be done I think by uh
uh in in in the relatively short term.
It's not going to take years, but I
can't give you the exact timeline.
>> Got it. So, when we look at maybe like
uh an OP chain that launched with a lot
of success, um maybe they had deep ties
to a large organization that's very
centralized and custodial. Are what how
do we compete against that sort of
strategy? Um, it's really easy to just
funnel people onto a chain if they don't
necessarily care about decentralization
or how decentralized a sequencer network
is because the chain is very fast and
they can launch all sorts of stuff on it
and and use it really quickly. What does
competition look like for using like a
ZK chain um that doesn't necessarily
have deep ties to a single large scale
centralized entity?
uh I don't think you have to compete
necessarily in this regard like you
don't compete with your users you follow
what your users want and you build
products that uniquely provide value. So
what we're looking at from from the
perspective of our product road map is
what are the demands of the users and
what are the niches where we can build
and solve these demands better than than
anything else that that exists today
where where where do we create more
value? So if users don't care about
security, it
like they should go to places where
they're where they served best. Maybe
they would just want to go to
centralized exchanges and they're
willing to trust them and it's perfectly
fine. It's their needs that that where
where they will be served where the the
customers that we see who do care a lot
about security, real security and and
real uh lowering of trust assumptions
between the counterparties are the
financial institutions, enterprises,
real world businesses. That is where our
focus is today because we bring more
value to them. They're not going to
embrace optimistic roll-ups uh as
easily. Uh they they cannot connect to
each other. using optimistic roll-ups.
In fact, they would not use optimistic
like most of the the teams were or or
projects large enterprises we're talking
to would not even consider an optimistic
rollup. Our the alternative we're
dealing with is Hyperledger Bezu, not a
Pstack because they don't care. They
they can run it themselves. They have
strict requirements on privacy, on
compliance, and on the way they operate
their infrastructure. They want to host
that the services on prem. They want
full control. They want the full ability
to um to decide on permissioning of
those systems, who can go in, who can do
what. This is not a cipher punk utopia,
but this is the reality that they are
dealing with in their businesses. Now
what we allow them to do is to grow up
from from this infancy stage where if
you use a fully private chain inhouse,
you're not very far off from a database.
It's like a slightly better version of a
database where you can use some smart
contracts to reflect some of the of your
internal accounting, but that's it. When
you upgrade from an a fully private
chain to a ZK previdium, a ZK based
private chain on Ethereum, all of a
sudden you get access to the entire new
digital economy on chain starting with
Ethereum layer 1, having access to ETH
and all the other digital assets of
Ethereum, but then also connecting to
other private chains and be able to
exchange value directly peer-to-peer the
privacy preserving way between the uh uh
let's say two banks that are uh residing
in different jurisdictions where each of
the banks will keep the data centers in
under their control in their
jurisdiction. they can still talk to
each other directly with using the ZK
native uh interoperability protocol
without having to introduce third-party
assumptions without having to enter any
consortium arrangements that have been
tried for the last couple of years with
between these financial institutions and
they they have repeatedly failed because
it's really hard like banks don't trust
each other contrary to maybe some
popular beliefs they don't trust each
other they definitely don't trust banks
from other jurisdictions
because they know that they have to
follow very different compliance rules.
So it's it's not something that's going
to work. Um they want this direct
disintermediated uh mathematically
cryptographically backed ability to to
create trust.
>> I I intuitively understand the value
proposition that something like Pvidium
brings, but I I was trying to have this
conversation recently with someone who's
a just a blockchain skeptic in general.
And I couldn't give like a realworld
example of how uh two banking entities
would want to have their information in
a database but also be able to
intermingle what they chose to share
with one another. I couldn't give like a
real world example of what this could
be. So in your conversations and without
even going into names or specific
details, what has been like an example
of a way in which a bank wants to have a
somewhat more distributed internal
ledger that can communicate with another
internal ledger at another bank. What
would be like the assets that they want
to be able to prove that they have but
not show how much of those assets they
have? What would be like a tangible
example? Very simple. It would be the
bank's own assets that they tokenize. So
users of the bank, the customers of the
bank put money into the bank account.
The bank tokenizes this deposit giving
them the receipts. the basically the
stable coins, the private stable coin of
this bank that the customers can then
take and send to other um customers of
maybe a different bank or maybe to a
different subsidiary of a of if they are
a multinational corporation like you you
have a tokenized deposit from a bank in
Paris and you want to send it to your
subsidiary in Tokyo uh and uh you cannot
do payments today that would be instant
and would work 24/7. You cannot send uh
settle a payment on a Saturday
afternoon. Uh which creates a lot of
friction and a lot of cost for this um
cross uh border transacting entities
where they have to pay their customers,
their their suppliers or or their
partners. And the beauty of this uh
example is it's actually driven by the
customers of the bank and not by the
bank or the banks themselves. And this
creates a very strong power dynamics. So
the banks are not necessarily in um like
in willing to embrace blockchains on
their own. It's or or the other
institutions. They're happy with the
current status quo. They're happy with
how finance 1.0 works. They are happy
with t plus 2 t plus 5 days settlement
because that's the time where they're
going to earn the interest on all the
funds residing at rest. they're making
huge profits out of it. It's the
customers who are unhappy and the
customers are creating the pressure on
the banks and financial institutions of
of other sorts. And so what the
institutions are facing is essentially
an adopt or die moment because the ones
who cannot adopt and embrace these new
technologies will simply be left out. If
your business model still requires T
plus2 T plus 5 days of settlement, you
won't be in the business any longer. Not
after the genius act that it's legalized
stable coins. It's over now. Everything
everyone is going to embrace stable
coins and it's going to be a lot of
different types of stable coins. There
will be this big centralized uh or
centrally issued stable coins of uh USDT
and USDC. But there will be also small a
lot of small stable coins issued by the
banks directly. And there will be some
services of clearing where that allow
the banks to to exchange the or like the
customers of uh of of different uh banks
to to exchange stable coins for
something that they can redeem with
their own bank. But all of that is going
to happen in in seconds rather than
days. And it's it's all going to be like
globally interconnected uh network of
value that begins with stable coins but
then it expands to everything else to
all the RWAs um to all types of
tokenized assets. So today, Ziki sync is
uh uh the second largest RWA economy uh
on in crypto, second only to to Ethereum
chain uh which you can um check on on
RWXY Z, but today it's largely private
credit. This is the uh the the asset
that was the easiest to tokenize and
expand. We'll see a lot more types of
assets coming into this race. We'll see
tokenized stocks. we'll see tokenized uh
um um forms of uh various financial
derivatives and so on and so on. So it's
going to be an ever expanding uh
snowball.
Awesome. So as we wrap up and and zoom
out, um the kind of like final big
picture question I want to ask and you
definitely just touched on this is how
are you guys skating to the puck of
stable coins? How are you going to where
stable coins are going? How are you
preparing uh ZK sync providium today to
be able to meet the stable coin demand
starting in 2026 and beyond after Genius
Act is enabled? Uh it's what we're doing
with the infrastructure which which is
building this network of connectivity.
Stable coins are as valuable as the
network of participants who can accept
them. This is true for for any network
for with any network effects. You have
the metall
uh
crypto is already very strong in network
effects today. We're going to expand it
multiffold 1000,000 xfold bringing more
institutions around the world onchain
meeting when them where they are with
their requirements on privacy
uh compliance and connectivity while
preserving privacy and compliance which
was uh next to impossible before
preidiums. I love it. Um, so if
anybody's listening to this right now,
whether you're a big fat cat banker
who's hiding behind an anon account on
crypto Twitter or you're a developer
who's interested in building in in on
the ZK stack, what's the best way for
people to reach out to you and your
team, Alex?
>> Um, you can follow us on ax.com under zk
and myself personally under gluk64.
And uh, you check out our new website
zksc.io. Uh there is a button to connect
and our team will be happy to talk to
you and walk you through everything.
>> Awesome. Alex, thank you so much for
taking the time to chat to with us
today. Um, it was a phenomenal dig into
your background, into ZK in general, and
it's amazing to see where the technology
has taken us to at this point and how
we're kind of at this like perfect mesh
of institutional adoption and the the
the feasibility and usability of of ZK
technology. Um, it's a really exciting
time and I will continue to enjoy
following uh ZKSync's uh continued
growth and onboarding of this new asset
class into bringing everybody on chain.
So, yeah, thank you so much for your
time today. It was really awesome.
>> Thank you, Dylan. It was my pleasure.
>> Cheers. Thank you so much for tuning in
to the Smart Economy podcast. To stay in
the loop with all of our latest episodes
and insights, head over to
www.smarteconomyodcast.com.
smarteconomyodcast.com
and don't forget to subscribe to our
YouTube channel for all of our video
content. If you enjoyed today's
discussion, please consider showing your
support by liking, commenting, and
reviewing this episode on your favorite
podcasting platform. Your feedback helps
us reach more listeners and bring you
even better content. We'd also love to
hear from you. So, please drop a comment
on Spotify or YouTube to share what
topics you'd like us to cover or who
you'd like to see as our next guest. And
if you or someone you might know would
make for a great guest, please reach
out. We're always on the hunt for fresh
voices and new perspectives.
And for our NEO token holders out there,
please consider voting for NEON News
Today as your council representative.
We've proudly been serving the NEO
ecosystem since 2017 and we'll continue
to do so by putting portions of our
council rewards directly back into
ecosystem growth initiatives. So once
again, thank you so much for listening
and we cannot wait to catch up with you
next time.